---
title: Use Docker tags to document the lifecycle of an image
updated_at: 2021-04-09 20:10:32.000000000 +02:00
tags:
- "#public"
- "#stage/blooming"
---


A Docker image typically goes through a lifecycle:

1. **built**: the image is successfully built
2. **tested**: the image has successfully passed tests (e.g. integration tests, security tests)
3. **deployed to staging**: the image is deployed into the staging environment
4. **deployed to production**: the image is deployed into the production environment

It’s advantageous to add a new tag when the image progresses to a new stage in the lifecycle.

As an example, take the Git commit SHA  `0b3da7f`:
1. If an image is built from this Git commit, the Docker image can be tagged as `built-0b3da7f`.
2. Once tests have passed, it can be tagged additionally as `tested-0b3da7f` (note that previously added tags are kept).
3. Once deployed to staging, it can be tagged as `deployed-staging-0b3da7f`.
4. Once deployed to production, it can be tagged as `deployed-production-0b3da7f`.

## Advantages to cleanup
The list of tags can be used to be clean up stale Docker images. For each Docker image, the following can be checked:

* Does the image have a tag like `deployed-production-…`, and is it one of the 10 most recent images tagged like `deployed-production-…`? If so, keep it.
* Does the image have a tag like `deployed-staging-…`, and is it one of the 20 most recent images tagged like `deployed-staging-…`? If so, keep it.
* Does the image have a tag like `tested-…`, and is it less than 30 days old? If so, keep it.
* Is the image younger than 5 days? If so, keep it.
* Otherwise, delete it.

## Advantages to safety
When deploying a Git commit, the deploy script can construct the appropriate Docker tag to deploy. For example, to perform a staging deploy, concatenate `tested-` with the (short) Git SHA, e.g. `tested-0b3da7f`. Pull the Docker image with that tag and deploy it.

The deployment will fail if no Docker image with such a tag exists. In other words, the deployment will fail if the Docker image did not pass tests.

Some cautionary notes:

* Such a deploy script should probably use the full Git SHA, rather than an abbreviated one as used in the examples.
* Hotfixes might need to be taken into account. While this added safety is nice, it can slow down the process and make hotfixes too slow to deploy.

## Use outside of Docker
This approach is not limited to Docker. While I have not done so myself, I imagine it could work for publishing builds on an S3 bucket or similar.

How it could work (assuming `0b3da7f` is the Git commit SHA of the build, which itself is a `.tar.gz` file):

1. Create a bucket with directories `builds` and `tags`.
2. When a build is published, store it in `builds/0b3da7f.tar.gz`. Create the file `tags/built-0b3da7f` and store in it the string `builds/0b3da7f.tar.gz`.
3. When a build is tested, create the file `tags/tested-0b3da7f` and store in it the string `builds/0b3da7f.tar.gz`.
4. When a build is deployed to staging, create the file `tags/deployed-staging-0b3da7f` and store in it the string `builds/0b3da7f.tar.gz`.
5. When a build is deployed to production, create the file `tags/deployed-production-0b3da7f` and store in it the string `builds/0b3da7f.tar.gz`.

To facilitate cleanup, it might be necessary to add the date to each tag, e.g. `tags/deployed-production-20210222-0b3da7f`, with `20210222` being the current date (February 22nd, 2021). With the date in the tag name, it becomes possible to parse out the date and delete stale builds.