---
title: A good markup language is resilient against failure
updated_at: 2021-04-03 10:09:43.000000000 +02:00
tags:
- "#public"
---


[D★Mark](https://ddfreyne.github.io/d-mark/) is strict in its input, and the chance of accidentally having unprocessed D★Mark in generated output is very low.

This is unlike Markdown, where most implementations either silently ignore markup they don’t recognise, or print a warning that is easy to miss. Badly formatted links are commonplace, and I’ve spotted broken Markdown links such as `(some link target)[//example.com]` in the wild, multiple times.

Markdown (with its dozen variations) is bound to have this issue, because its syntax is complex.

On the other hand, D★Mark’s syntax is simple, and it’s always unambiguous whether some piece of markup is intended to be markup or not. D★Mark spits out no warnings, and errors out instead. If there is ambiguity, it will print out a helpful error message and refuse to continue. Consider the following:

```
31%% of all statistics are made up.
```

The double percentage sign is needed here as an escape sequence.  The `%` symbol is typically used to start an element in inline form (e.g. `%code{bloop}`), and to get a literal percentage sign, the `%` needs to be escaped as `%%`.

D★Mark _could_ have guessed the intention of the writer, but this introduces some level of ambiguity. It also introduces unexpected behavior: if `31% of all statistics` were allowed markup, it would make sense for `31%ish of all statistics` to be allowed as well. `%ish` would be very similar to the inline form of an `ish` element though. Should D★Mark error on this? Should it output a literal `31%ish`?

The ambiguity prevents a clear answer to these questions, and so D★Mark is strict and does not allow ambiguity.