---
title: Naming principles
updated_at: '2021-02-01 08:03:14'
---

# Naming principles
In my talk “The important of naming” (Defreyne 2020), I set out six naming principles:

**Use only one name to refer to a concept.** Each concept must have one name only. If a concept has multiple names, decide on its canonical name, and stop using other names.

**Give different concepts different names.** Each name must be used for one concept only. If a name refers to multiple concepts, decide on its canonical concept, and stop using it for other concepts.

**Rename concepts when principles are violated.** I expect principles to be broken over time, as software evolves. Make renaming quick and easy.

**Ensure names match meaning.** A name is no good if it is difficult to remember what it stands for, or when it seems to fit another concept better.

**Break up concepts that cannot be named properly.** If a single concept cannot be named appropriately, it is likely that this single concept is a set of multiple concepts, in the guide of a single one. Note that breaking up a concept could require many changes, including database schema changes.

**Be consistently correct.** Consistency brings predictability, and predictability keeps cognitive overhead low.

## Tips
Create a glossary. Keep maintaining that glossary.

Use deprecation mechanisms that your language or frameworks provide. Source code comments can be appropriate for that purpose.

## References
Defreyne, Denis. 2020. “The Importance of Naming.” February 6. https://speakerdeck.com/ddfreyne/the-importance-of-naming.
