---
title: How to write a good README for a product
updated_at: 2021-06-02 10:02:52.000000000 +02:00
tags:
- "#public"
---


A good README document contains the following:

* **Name**: What is the name of the product? Does the product go by other names as well, and if so, what are the other names?

* **Description**: What is the purpose of this product? Describe in one or two sentences. It needs to be understandable for people unfamiliar with the product.

* **Who owns it**: Which team or person is the point of contact?

* **Stage**: What is the stage of this product? Is it in development, active, deprecated, or obsolete?

* **Endpoints**: If this product is a web app or web service, where can it be reached? Include information for all environments (production, staging, sandbox, and others).

* **Requirements/dependencies**: What needed to develop and/or run this product?
	* What programming language does it use? (e.g. Ruby)
	* Which specific programming language implementation does it require, if any? (e.g. MRI but not JRuby)
	* Which other development tools does it require to have installed? (e.g. Bundler)
	* Which libraries or frameworks does it use? Ideally, this question is answered by a file that lists the dependencies, directly usable by package manager (e.g. a <span class="path">Gemfile</span> or a <span class="path">package.json</span> file). However, it might need system libraries installed (e.g. a MySQL client library).
	* Which application dependencies does this product have? This includes databases and other (web) services. It might also include Docker, which provides Docker Compose, an easy way to run dependencies.

* **How do I…**: Describe basic tasks. These should all be 
	* **How do I run it locally?** For example, run <span class="path">exe/myapp</span>.
	* **How do I run the tests?** For example, run <span class="path">bin/test</span>.
	* **How do I create a release package?** This is probably mostly/only relevant for user-installable software, such as desktop apps. For example, run <span class="path">bin/build --release</span>.
	* **How do I deploy/release it?** For example, run <span class="path">bin/publish</span>.

* **Detailed resources**: Add links to more detailed documentation here: a detailed architecture overview, runbooks, and a glossary are all good to have.