---
title: A globally-available filesystem is a security liability
updated_at: 2021-03-07 10:05:25.000000000 +01:00
tags:
- "#public"
---


Virtually every non-trivial program pulls in third-party libraries. As we, as software/security engineers, have no time to carefully review every third-party library (and its dependencies, and transitive dependencies), we implicitly put a lot of trust in these third-party libraries.

This doesn’t always work out well: think of [the event-stream incident](https://www.theregister.com/2018/11/26/npm_repo_bitcoin_stealer/):

> A widely used Node.js code library listed in NPM's warehouse of repositories was altered to include crypto-coin-stealing malware. The lib in question, _event-stream_, is downloaded roughly two million times a week by application programmers.

If an application can access the filesystem, then the third-party libraries can too, because the filesystem is typically globally available.

It is typically not possible to give restricted access to a third-party library.

Sandboxing doesn’t solve this problem, because if your application has access to the filesystem, all (transitively) dependent packages automatically have access to the filesystem as well.

## Dependency injection as a possible solution
A solution would be to not make the filesystem globally available, but only in the application’s entry point, and allow a reference to the filesystem to be passed to functions (including ones in third-party libraries) that need it.

This is dependency injection used from a security angle.

This way, a third-party library would only be able to access the filesystem when it is explicitly passed in. A third-party library wouldn’t by default be able to encrypt your hard drive or read your Bitcoin wallet.

This could be made more fine-grained: rather than injecting a reference to the entire filesystem, a reference to a directory or to a specific file could be injected. This way, a third-party library could be granted limited access to exactly what it needs to operate properly.

## References
Francisco, Thomas Claburn in San. n.d. “Check Your Repos... Crypto-Coin-Stealing Code Sneaks into Fairly Popular NPM Lib (2m Downloads per Week).” Accessed March 7, 2021. https://www.theregister.com/2018/11/26/npm_repo_bitcoin_stealer/.

“Npm Blog Archive: Details about the Event-Stream Incident.” n.d. Accessed March 7, 2021. https://blog.npmjs.org/post/180565383195/details-about-the-event-stream-incident.