---
title: A “users” table is a smell
updated_at: 2021-05-17 19:13:11.000000000 +02:00
tags:
- "#public"
---


One of the first tables that gets created when a new web application is set up, is a “users” table, to contain all the users that can sign in to the web application.

What is a “user” though?

* A user is **not a set of credentials**, because I might use multiple in the same web application (for example, sign in with username and password, or sign in via Google).

* A user is **not a person**, because I might use multiple in the same web application for different purposes (for example, a personal one, and one for work).

* A user is **not an identity**, because I might use multiple in the same web application for different purposes (for example, on SoundCloud, I might have multiple artist pseudonyms).

The concept of “user” is vague and conflates credentials and identities. As an alternative, consider having separate *credentials* and *identities* tables, and an *accounts* table to link them together:

* **Credentials** are used for authentication. A person typically only has one set of credentials, and credentials are never shared between people[^credentials-never-shared].

* **Identities** (a.k.a. profiles) defines how a person might present themselves. A person can present themselves in multiple ways.

[^credentials-never-shared]: Credentials _should_ never be shared, but it still happens far too often.

The **accounts** table connects credentials and identities: one account (e.g. my personal account) can have multiple credentials and multiple identities associated with it.

Note that an account does not correspond to a person either. I might have two accounts (a personal one and one for work) with separate sets of credentials and separate identities.

## Example
As an example, imagine SoundCloud with separate credentials and identities concepts:

* **I can have multiple credentials:** I can sign in into my account in multiple ways: username and password, email address used for a magic link, Google sign-in, …)
* **I can have multiple profiles (identities):** I have my own soundcloud.com/denis page, but I can create other pages for other pseudonyms (I have no other ones at the moment, but I could have).

Furthermore, a single SoundCloud profile (a.k.a identity) could have multiple accounts linked to it. Imagine a SoundCloud profile for a band, that all band members can access.