---
title: Syntax styles in programming languages
updated_at: 2021-05-14 09:25:45.000000000 +02:00
tags:
- "#public"
---


This is a collection of different syntactical styles in programming languages. It’s woefully incomplete.

## Comments
Single line comments:

- `// abc` (C, Java, …)
- `# abc` (Ruby, bash, …)
- `; abc` (Lisp family, …)
- `% abc` (TeX)
- `-- abc` (Lua)

Multi-line comments:

- `/* abc */` (C, Java, …)
- `(* abc *)` (Pascal)
- `"abc"` (Smalltalk)

Multi-line comments might not really be that useful.

## Indentation and bracing
Braces (C, Java, … style):

```plaintext
stuff {
  thing
}
```

`do`–`end` (Ruby style):

```plaintext
stuff do
  thing
end
```

Explicitly naming the thing to end:

```plaintext
stuff
  thing
end stuff
```

There’s also bash’s bizarre way of ending statements, with reverse keywords like `elihw` and `esac`, but that’s just silly.

## Calls
Regular math-style or C-style function calls:

```plaintext
cos(pi)
plus(2, 3)
```

Haskell-style calls (without parentheses):

```plaintext
cos pi
plus 2 3
```

OO-style calls (Smalltalk style):

```plaintext
pi cos
2 plus: 3
```

OO-style calls (Ruby style, i.e. no parentheses needed):

```plaintext
pi.cos
2.plus(3)
```

This approach makes it non-trivial to get hold of the method as an object.

OO-style calls (JavaScript style):

```plaintext
pi.cos()
2.plus(3)
```

Getting hold of the method itself is simple in this case.[^bound]

[^bound]: The question of how the method is bound remains. If you get the method, is it still bound to the original object, or not? If not, how do you call it? Do you pass `self` as the first argument, perhaps?

Concatenative style (like Forth and Factor):

```plaintext
pi cos
2 3 plus
```

::**To do**: Describe named parameters::

## Function definitions
No braces, implicit return:

```plaintext
fun greeting()
  "Hello!"
end
```

The parentheses, if no parameters are available, could be left out:

```plaintext
fun greeting
  "Hello!"
end
```

Braces, explicit return:

```plaintext
fun greet() {
  return "Hello!"
}
```

Braces, shorthand, implicit return:

```plaintext
fun greet() = "Hello!"
```

With positional parameters:

```plaintext
fun greet(name)
  return "Hello, ${name}"
end
```

With default value, assigned using `=` (Python style):

```plaintext
fun greet(name = "stranger")
  return "Hello, ${name}"
end
```

With default value, assigned using `:` (Ruby style):

```plaintext
fun greet(name: "stranger")
  return "Hello, ${name}"
end
```

Using `:` can conflict with type declarations.

::**To do**: Describe variable-argument definitions::

## Method definitions
::**To do**: associated functions::

::**To do**: instance variables::

::**To do**: self (this instance), e.g. `this.doSomething()`::

::**To do**: self (this type), e.g. `new thisClass`::

## Strings
Double-quoted:

```plaintext
"Hello"
```

With interpolation, Ruby style:

```plaintext
"Hello, #{name}"
```

With interpolation, Python style:

```plaintext
f"Hello, {name}"
```

With interpolation, JavaScript style:

```plaintext
`Hello, ${name}`
```

::**To do**: Characters::

## Iteration
I’m leaving out old-school C-style for loop iteration because I think it’s too old-school.

Dedicated `for` construct:

```plaintext
for elem in iterable {
    // …
}
```

Function:

```plaintext
iterable.each(func (elem) {
    // …
})
```

Note that the above can’t use `return` to break out of the loop. Smalltalk-style non-local returns would allow that, but it’d return from the function entirely:

```plaintext
"a strange way to get the first element of an iterable"
iterable do: [:elem | ^elem]
```

Ruby has blocks and functions, and thus has nonlocal returns and can break out of blocks. Ruby also has a ton of custom iterators, like `#times`:

```plaintext
12.times do
  # …
end
```

## Ranges
* `1..100` 
	* In Ruby, is an inclusive range (contains 100)
	* In Rust, is an exclusive range (does not contain 100)
* `1..=100`
	* In Rust, is an inclusive range (contains 100)
* `1...100`
	* In Ruby, is an exclusive range (does not contain 100)
* `range(1, 100)`
	* In Python, is an exclusive range (does not contain 100)

## Equality
Ugh! This one is complicated. Common ways to check for equality are:

* `==`
* `===`
* `====`
* `equals()` (Java) or `eql?()` (Ruby)
*  `equal?()` (in Ruby: identity, i.e. same object)

Different types of equality to take into account:

* Is this identical, i.e. same object?
* Are the types equal, and the values equal?
* Are the types different, but the values equal? (e.g. `1.0` and `1`)

Ruby’s `===` is confusing (“case equality” is ambiguous and hard to explain).