---
title: Code in a good programming language does not reveal its author
updated_at: 2021-03-05 20:32:42.000000000 +01:00
tags:
- "#public"
---


A good programming language limits choices, and provides a One True Way. In a good programming language, two pieces of code written by two developers should look alike.

## Syntax
A good programming language should either be strict in the syntax it accepts, or provide a built-in source code formatter (with little or no configuration options).

Go has a built-in source code formatter, and all Go source code looks alike.

Ruby has [Rubocop](https://github.com/rubocop-hq/rubocop), which has created a great deal of consistency in modern Ruby projects. Even though it is an unofficial tool, it has become a de-facto standard.

## Aliases
A good programming language should either provide no aliases for functions and methods, or make it clear which variant is the canonical one.

A source code formatter could help to ensure source code only uses the canonical names, though this might only be realistic in a statically-typed language.

Ruby fails at this. Many methods have alternative names. For example, there are the identical methods `#select`, `#find_all`, and `#filter`, and there is no canonical one. The unofficial [Ruby style guide](https://github.com/rubocop-hq/ruby-style-guide) has [guidance on the canonical name for the map/find/select/reduce/include?/size methods](https://github.com/rubocop-hq/ruby-style-guide#map-find-select-reduce-include-size) , but it remains an unofficial style guide.

## References
Batsov, Bozhidar. (2011) 2021. “Ruby Style Guide.” https://github.com/rubocop-hq/ruby-style-guide.