---
title: Avoid naughty words in hex digest strings by changing the set of characters
updated_at: '2021-01-11 08:45:25'
---


Hexadecimal strings typically contain 0–9 and a–f, which gives plenty of opportunity for (naughty) words to form (Batchelder, 2007), e.g. “deadbabe”.

If we also accept “9” as a substitute for “g,” then even more (naughty) words can be built, e.g. “defacedfa9”. Your imagination is the limit.

## Remove vowels
To avoid accidentally generating words, we can remove vowels (A E I O U, and arguably Y) from the list of possible characters, and additionally remove characters that can stand in for vowels (0 1 3 4).

The set of characters we use for representing hexadecimal strings therefore becomes shifted: instead of `0123456789abcdef`, we now have `256789bcdfghjklm`.

Performing this replacement is trivial with `tr` on the command line:

```
% echo 1337cafebabe | tr 0123456789abcdef 256789bcdfghjklm
577cjgmlhghl
```

Ruby’s `String#tr` does the same:

```
'1337cafebabe'.tr('0123456789abcdef', '256789bcdfghjklm')
# => "577cjgmlhghl"
```

## Remove ambiguous characters
We can go further and remove ambiguous characters as well. While not necessary, it is helpful when writing down hexadecimal strings (especially when using non-conventional characters, like we do).

Ambiguous characters include B D G J Q S Z and 0 1 2 5 6 8 (with 0 and 1 already removed because they can substitute a vowel). The set of characters we use for representing hexadecimal strings has shifted again: instead of `256789bcdfghjklm` (which replaced `0123456789abcdef`), we now have `79cfhklmnprtvwxz`.

We can use it the same way. Command line:

```
% echo 1337cafebabe | tr 0123456789abcdef 79cfhklmnprtvwxz
9ffmvrzxtrtx
```

Ruby:

```
'1337cafebabe'.tr('0123456789abcdef', '79cfhklmnprtvwxz')
# => "9ffmvrzxtrtx"
```

Note how `79cfhklmnprtvwxz` is exactly 16 characters and ends with `z`. A wonderful coincidence.

## See also
[[Good human-usable tokens are not random strings]]

## References
Batchelder, Ned. “Hex Words,” March 20, 2007. https://nedbatchelder.com/text/hexwords.html.