---
title: Tooling for a good programming language
updated_at: 2021-05-13 09:35:35.000000000 +02:00
tags:
- "#public"
---


A good programming language comes with tooling that makes it easy to use and hard to mis-use.

## Code quality analyser
Code quality tooling comes in various forms:

* **Formatters**: There ideally is only one canonical style guide for the programming language, and a formatter is available to verify adherence to the style guide. Ideally, the formatter has an auto-correct option as well. See `gofmt`, `rustfmt`, `rubocop --auto-correct`, `prettier`, and others.

* **Static code analysis tooling**: This includes detecting common bugs, but also performing security analysis.

* **Upgrader**: A programming language that is still in active development will change, and having a tool that can automatically upgrade to newer syntax will be helpful.

## Package management
::**To do**: everything about this::

::**To do**: security analyser for dependencies. e.g. bundle audit, yarn audit, etc. Ideally also an auto-fixer.::

## Testing framework
A good programming language comes with a testing framework built-in. 

::**To do**: Rely on convention to find a place to store specs, or integrate it into the language? For example, Go’s approach to putting tests in-line, with the `_test` file name suffix, is integrated into the language::

## Documentation
A good programming language needs the ability to generate and consume documentation:

- Be able to document code, with documentation being a first-class concept. See Python’s docstrings for example.

- Integrate with IDEs, perhaps through the Language Server Protocol (LSP). This would enable traversing code, across modules and across packages, and provide inline documentation where and when it is needed.

* Be able to generate documentation as HTML.

## Installation
Possibly not related to tooling around the programming language itself, but being able to install it easily, without having to deal with dependencies manually, would be ideal. A simple `brew install` would be perfect, even if a `brew tap` is needed (and similar for other OSes).